In the last video,
we were putting together our proposal and the only thing left to
do is click the Submit A Proposal button right here.
I'm not going to do that because I don't actually want to submit a proposal.
But what happens after you submit a proposal it's up to the client.
Don't feel discouraged if you don't get a response back.
This is just the nature of Upwork.
If somebody doesn't want to work with you,
usually you weren't receive a response and on the odd occasion,
you actually receive an email from Upwork saying that
your proposal was rejected or that they hired another person.
Oftentimes, however, you don't know if they even read your proposal.
I wouldn't get too worried about it when you send up that proposal,
stop thinking about it and let the client come back to you.
There's nothing else that you can do.
The next stage after sending your proposal is you get a response back.
What will happen is, in Upwork,
you can go to your messages tab right here,
we can also access this using the Upwork app.
But essentially what will happen will be,
a new message will appear in your inbox.
I've blurred out the names here to respect the privacy of my clients.
But if I go down and find an example to bring up for you guys.
Right here you'll see your proposal sent as
a message and then you'll see as the next entry,
a response from the client,
if of course they go back to you.
Now the process here is just to chat with the client and figure out if it's a good fit.
Figure out if the client is easy to work with.
You want to know exactly what thereafter.
This is where you can negotiate on price as well,
just because the job had a budget of $400 and you bid that and they're talking to you,
or you put your hourly in and now they're talking to you,
doesn't mean that that's going to be the exact hourly
or project budget that will be sent in the offer.
You can also negotiate price during this stage.
You chat it out and then hopefully you'll get an offer.
Once you get the offer, you can click on this link to view details.
It'll take you to this page right here where you can see the offer details.
Usually there's buttons on the side here to accept the offer.
Currently, this is one that I've already accepted,
so I don't have those buttons there,
but you can either accept or decline the offer on this page as well.
This is the official offer.
If you accept this offer,
you are now under contract with the client and that
means that you can start charging time to the time sheet
if it's an hourly job or you can
submit a request for payment if you've actually completed the job.
Once you're on the contract,
it means that you guys are connected now on Upwork and once the contract closes,
you'll be giving each other reviews.
It's very important that you evaluate the client and you don't just accept any offer.
You make sure that the client is going to be good
to work with and that you're not going to have any issues
because once you've already accepted that offer you now
have an obligation to them and Upwork definitely looks at that.
The next stage of course after accepting the offer and signing the contract,
is to actually perform the work and manage the client relationship.
Obviously, we're not going to cover performing the work in
this course because it's going to be different depending on what work you are performing.
That is where your existing skills come into play.
In terms of managing the client relationship,
that's something we'll get into in the next video.
For now, on this video on getting hired,
the next stage after this,
I guess you've already been hired but just to cap off the contract process on Upwork,
is pausing or closing the contract.
This is important for a few reasons which we'll talk about in a later video but,
you want to either pause or close the contract or follow up with
the client if the contract is just idle for a few days to a few weeks.
Just to run through the whole process,
after you've accepted the offer,
you're under contract, you've done the work,
the client is happy,
you are asked to end the contract.
Then once you end contract,
you'll fill out some details about did this go
well and you'll give a review to your client,
and I'm sure the client will receive something similar.
They'll select whether the job was completed
successfully and they'll give you a rating and a review.
After that, you're done the contract is over and the client may or
may not contact you again in future. It's up to them.
I believe you can still message them on Upwork through the same message stream,
but you're not under any obligation to do anything for them at that point,
the contract is over and you've completed that specific job.
This process is virtually the same anytime you do a contract on Upwork,
except for the case in which you're invited to apply for a job.
Actually clients have the opportunity or the option
to send you an invitation to apply for a position.
This is something that you'll get more
commonly as you start to build a really good profile.
So what you'll get when a client invites you to a job is you'll
get a notification in your email or in your Upwork dashboard.
What you'll do is arrive at
a certain page that looks a little bit like a job description,
but it has a few buttons.
One to accept the invitation and another to decline the invitation.
If you decline, it asks you to give a reason.
You're free to decline any invite that you get sent through.
I declined most of the invites because they're not a good fit or the budget is too low,
you can flag that reason in the form when you're declining the invitation.
Otherwise, if you like the sound of the job or you want to know more about it,
click accept, and it'll go through and ask you to send a proposal.
Now I say proposal because I don't structure these proposals the same
way that I send proposals when I'm basically cold messaging these clients,
what I do is I am bit more casual with it.
If they've already looked at my profile and are interested in me doing the job.
I basically just say whether it's a good fit and I'm
excited to work with them and maybe ask them a question that I have about the project,
move the conversation forward or I will say something like this where I say,
hi, I would love to hear more about your project
and find out if it's a good fit for my services.
Sometimes I get them to book in for a chat
and for me that just shows if they make a booking for a chat,
they're serious and I can do a lot more on the phone,
then I can do going back and forth on chat.
That's basically another step that you could get
to that stage of getting in the chat room of the client but for now,
it's exactly the same as what we've just discussed.
They'll send you an offer, if it's all good,
and then you accept and then you're in contract together.
There's three things to remember here that I just wanted to make clear.
Number one, this is your chance to further evaluate the client.
Remember, we don't want to accept anything that comes our way.
Once you're in contract with the client,
there are certain responsibilities you have to
them and they're able to give you a review.
If you have a bad relationship and the job doesn't go too well,
then that's going to be a problem and you might actually get a low review from it.
What you want to do is make sure that
the client is going to be good to work with as best as possible.
I mean, you get a better feel over time but if they seem too demanding,
they seem like they don't know what they want,
you don't know if you're even a good fit for this job,
if you feel uneasy about it whatsoever,
besides being a bit nervous as to your confidence
of completing a job that you know you should be able to complete.
Don't question your confidence in completing a job,
but just in terms of the client,
if they seem hard to work with or not the best fit,
don't feel too rushed to accept the offer.
In fact, what I like to do is wait a little bit,
get a feel for the client,
make sure they've got all their requirements in place and then
accept the offer if they've sent it quite early.
My second tip is to not be a yes man during this process.
What I mean by that, is just saying yes to everything that the client ask.
If the client says can you do this or can this be done,
don't just say yes.
There's a certain cultural difference,
I see in certain cultures where yes means something different to different people.
In the West where you're probably getting the majority of your clients from,
yes means a 100 percent yes. If that makes sense.
If you're a Westerner watching this,
you probably get it a 100 percent.
But what I mean is,
if you can't do something,
don't say yes to get the job.
If you aren't happy with something,
Clients actually will appreciate it
if you don't know how to do something instead of saying,
yes, you say, actually I don't know how to do it,
but here's the extra information I need in order to figure
out how to do it or I don't know how to do it,
but here's the process I would go about to find the answer.
They're going to appreciate that.
Remember, and this is something we'll get into in the next video,
is to communicate a lot.
I call it over-communicating.
You want to make sure that you're telling them
as much information as possible and that's going to put them at ease,
so don't be a yes man.
That's another tip for you.
This goes directly into my third point here,
which is consult if you can.
What I mean by consult is,
don't just be the freelancer who takes
direct instructions on what the client wants them to do,
but help the client through the process as well.
If they're leading you down a direction that you think is not going to help the client
and you can offer a better solution or a suggestion of how to do the job better.
Definitely, go ahead and do that.
Clients really appreciate it.
A lot of them actually don't know what exactly they want anyway.
If you can guide them through that process and kind be their consultants,
as well as the person who implements and performs the work,
then you're going to have a great client relationship.
Finally, speaking of client relationships,
that's what the next video is going to be all about,
so we segueing into that right now,
this video I wanted to make on the process of getting hired.
What happens from when you send your proposal to when you get sent an offer?
Then you click "Accept",
and then you start the contract.
That is basically the process that happens on Upwork.
The things to remember during this process is again,
to continue evaluating the client,
but then also negotiating If you haven't decided on the payment or what the scope of
the project is and get that sorted out as much as
possible before you click on any offer that they send through.
It's good to be aware of the process and it's good to be as prepared as
possible for when you click that accept offer button and you start a contract.
In the next video, we're going to talk about how you manage
that client relationship while you're on contracts with them.
We talked about a few of them here in this video,
but in the next video we're going to dive deeper into managing the client relationship,
so I'll see you in the next video.